will I get a legit evaluation or will
they just think I'm depressed you cut
out gaming and then you just replace it
with other crap people think that is a
particular thing that makes them bored
no your mind isn't a pro boredom State
ok this is a great question I see you
keep flaming therapy is there a
situation which therapy is the right
move what alternatives do you recommend
ways to give back to the community so
you know you're welcome to get involved
with us so we're we're you know as we're
training coaches and stuff what's
happening in the brain with you all of a
sudden stop enjoying games and actually
prefer doing more productive things is
it still about dopamine levels do you
find spirituality conflicts with
scientific research not at all so let me
be clear about a couple of things what I
say I'm on lightened know what at what
age it hasn't happened yet
I have a question if I try to get
professional help for video game
addiction will I get a legit evaluation
or will they just think I'm depressed I
really think I'm an emotional I have an
emotional dependency on games and I use
them to evade bad feelings to the point
that I can't get that get things I need
to get done okay so will you get a legit
evaluation or will they just think I'm
depressed so you will get a legit
evaluation and they will probably think
that you are depressed so the first
thing doctor says is that very few
mental health professionals understand
video game addiction or how video games
affect psychology or neuroscience and
that's not their fault right like when
we were training like in my training I
got over the course of four years in
about twelve to fifteen thousand hours
of training
I got a grand total of zero hours of
training on video game addiction and
that is at all places at the Harvard
Medical School and so the first thing
you guys need to understand is if you're
gonna seek a mental health evaluation
it's not their fault that they don't
understand video games it's not that no
one has been trained to ask are you
addicted to video games so that's the
work that I'm trying to do with the
American Psychiatric Association so I'm
putting together a continuing medical
education like a class for psychiatrists
to educate them about video game
addiction to try to get them I teach at
various places to try to raise awareness
so that people do like start asking
about it
but I think if you want to get proper
help I think it is your responsibility
to share this with them if you share
this sentence with them you walk in and
you say hey you talk to them they're
gonna ask you so what are you what's
bringing you in they're gonna I'll ask
that question they're like what's
bringing you in today they're gonna ask
this open-ended question about why
you're coming to see them and if you say
I really think I have an emotional
dependency on video games and I use them
to evade bad feelings to the point that
I can't get things I need to get done
that's all you need that's the perfect
answer they should be able to handle
that because remember that what
psychiatrists and psychologists and
therapists are good at is like not
necessarily understanding the nuances of
a particular addiction like if you go
see
me for example so I'm an addiction
psychiatrist and I work with people who
have like cocaine addictions but like I
don't know the ins and outs of like
using cocaine and what it does I'm not
an expert I've never even tried cocaine
so I don't I don't know really and know
anything about it but I can absolutely
help them with their emotional
dependency on it and how they use it to
evade bad feelings to the point that I
can't get things done because that's not
specific to video games right that's
just normal like that that's what we
deal with like a therapist should be
able to help you explore your emotional
dependency on video games should be able
to help you explore what it is that
you're using your video games to like
emotionally avoid because we do that for
all kinds of stuff like we watch TV we
engage in unhealthy relationships we use
substances of abuse all of that stuff
happens all the time and psychiatrists
should be able to handle that so I don't
think you're gonna get like a super
knowledgeable person about video game
addiction and what it does to you but I
think that's something that you have to
kind of educate them about and that you
guys can kind of like work on together
and I think you can get help I think you
just can't if they say like I think
you're depressed and and then I think
you should push back on that you can say
like yeah but I really think like video
games are my problem in that it may look
like depression but and so I think it's
very important if you're if you're with
a therapist that you say what is on your
mind because that's what really helps
them if you just say what's on your mind
even if you disagree with them that
should be fine and if they don't listen
to you then you should find a different
therapist unfortunately some of them no
one's you know no perfect so
um thoughts on coronavirus II I think
coronaviruses Batman I don't know like
what is going on in China where like
they're having all these like really bad
viruses break out not quite sure like
there's some kind of public health issue
there what are their breeding bad
viruses I don't know if it's because of
the way that they like keep their
chickens or what because there's so
little information about what's going on
but it's like that like it's not it's
not a coincidence that you know like
SARS the corona virus and like other
public health catastrophes or like
coming like when you have public health
catastrophe after public health
catastrophe come out of a particular
country like that's a problem right so
they they have something within their
system of reporting or the way that they
treat things or the way that they house
because these are all zoo and otic
infections right that's important to
remember as well so these are all like
like I think most of them were coming
from poultry so I think they've probably
got something going on in terms of like
the way that they're handling zoonotic
stuff so let's use Anakim paracin so mad
cow was a big deal you know like a
decade or more ago and we haven't really
heard much about mad cow mad cow by the
way is absolutely terrifying if you all
don't really know what it is it's a
terrifying concept in medicine and mad
cow isn't like as big of a deal now like
we don't hear about continual mad cow
outbreaks I'm sure they're conspiracy
theorists out there who say that oh
they're outbreaks happening all the time
but the truth is that like people have
made I think the UK and the US have
implemented like very strong although if
you really look at it kind of terrifying
levels of oversight like it isn't how
little oversight there is but they've
implemented sufficient oversight to
prevent further outbreaks of Mad Cow
which is really really great so my
question is I don't know what China's
public health policies are I don't know
if it's just they're unlucky but like I
think it's it's interesting and you know
you have to wonder why there are
multiple zoonotic bird related
infections that are like killing people
in China is it is it so bad because they
just don't have the infrastructure to
support the health like I don't know I
don't know what's going on but I think
from a systems perspective like that's
problematic
that's what I think I was wondering if
you could advise on recovering from
dopamine exhaustion I'm finding that
once I cut out gaming I tend to randomly
browse the internet and watch shows when
I would rather be developing productive
up hobbies and habits okay so fantastic
you and everyone else myself included
right so like it's not just about
cutting out gaming so this is a big
important point so we'll talk about
dopamine exhaustion in a second the
first thing to understand like the whole
reason that we did healthy gamer like
why is it called healthy gamer is
because I don't think gaming is actually
the problem right so people who take an
abstinence approach to gaming abstinence
only approach to gaming like for some
people it's very successful but like
what I think is way way more common than
someone cutting out gaming and then
transforming their lives is this you cut
out gaming and then you just replace it
with other crap so you got to get to the
root of why you're gaming in the first
place right you have to build a healthy
life for yourself what are the the
emotions that you're avoiding through
gaming because you can stop the gaming
but your brain is gonna find other way
to avoid the emotions and it'll like
you'll Sprouse read it and watch TV
shows to avoid your emotions you will
find a way to procrastinate if you
really want to procrastinate your mind
is really good at procrastination mind
is really good at avoidance so cutting
out gaming is a good and significant
step but I don't I think it's like a
band-aid it's like looking at the
symptom of the problem instead of the
root the root is like what is it in your
life why aren't you moving forward in
life what are you trying to avoid and
what are you like afraid of about
forward momentum so we had an interview
a couple weeks ago with crucify was kind
of talking about having an invisible
wall like when he tries to make progress
he runs to an invisible wall and we were
I was surprised to discover that his
invisible wall it's a great interview by
the way isn't actually a wall it's
actually himself holding himself back so
when he starts to make progress like on
if he gets a job like he quits it after
seven days but on day three he starts to
like not want to go and like that's
where the money is
and so a bizarre thing that happens is
like the better he does in life the more
his depression happens and I'd be
wondering
how common that pattern is so the
question is you know what is it that the
gaming is actually protecting you from
and if you can deal with those feelings
of shame or fear or social anxiety or
whatever like then you don't need shows
on the Internet
right because this is a game of
whack-a-mole I see this also in people
who have borderline personality disorder
eating disorders and substance use
there's a group of people that I you
know work with that all have all three
of those things so they have an eating
disorder they have something called BPD
so they do self-harm at behaviors and
they have problems with substances like
alcohol so this is like the the sort of
this textbook example of this like the
question that you're gonna see if you
take a medical board exam is like a 17
year old girl who cuts uses alcohol and
hasn't like is like underway and what we
find when we treat these people is if
you can control one of them the others
get worse and if you can control two of
them the last thing gets worse so if you
stop them from self harming and cut out
the alcohol they're eating gets worse if
you force them to eat or you engage in
like like anorexia treatment and you
stop them from drinking then they're
cutting gets worse I mean if you do
anorexia treatment and stop them from
cutting than their drinking gets worse
so like it's a game of whack-a-mole and
it can be really frustrating and
engender a lot of difficult dynamics
between you and the patient but the
issue here is that like all three of
those are coping mechanisms to deal with
negative emotion cutting is actually a
coping mechanism it's almost like a
meditative practice when you really talk
to people about it it's not they're not
trying to actually hurt themselves it's
just the pain focuses their mind and
like relieves them of emotional tension
if you talk to people who engage in
self-harm behaviors that's actually how
they describe it and so the cool thing
is that they get better when you start
teaching them things like meditation so
when you teach the meditation they have
something else that they can go to for
that emotional relief so you can play
whack-a-mole with Netflix Reddit and
gaming all you want to
and gaming I do think is like more
insidious because it engages our brain
in a more profound way then let's say
reddit or Netflix does like you have no
sense of like online identity or
accomplishment when you're well maybe
when you browse reddit and you get
uploaded we'll see there you go
that's why read it's addictive so like
Netflix is the least addict addictive it
sounds like reddit is a little bit more
addictive in gaming is even more
addictive so the issue is what's at the
root now the second thing is this person
is talking about dopamine exhaustion
there's got to be like YouTube videos on
our channel about this I hope if not
then I'll make one but this is just a
general concept that's important to
understand in terms of playing a lot of
video games when I work with people who
play excessive video games they talk
about like being bored and if you really
ask them like what's what they hate the
most and what they're trying to avoid
more than anything is not any kind of
emotion or anything like that is boredom
they hate boredom and when they stop
trying to play games they feel bored and
so I feel like the biggest enemy like
the biggest challenge is just straight
border like that's the challenge that's
them it's not some complicated
psychological your dad did this or
you're afraid of death or you know it's
not anything like that it's just boredom
so let's think about what boredom is
and we're gonna jump to the interview in
about five five minutes okay so when you
play video games your your mezzo limbic
the mesolimbic circuit of your brain
releases something called dopamine and
the bezel limbic circuit of your brain
is is that's one of the dopamine
circuits that governs pleasure and
reward so there are other dope there
other dopamine circuits for example that
regulate movement and things like that
so people who have Parkinson's disease
they also have like they have a dopamine
shortage in their brain so there are
lots of dopamine does a lot of stuff in
your brain it's not just pleasure and
reward but the Meisel limbic circuit is
devoted to pleasure and reward so when
you play a video game you dump a lot of
dopamine and on a regular basis in your
mieze olympic circuit with spikes of
higher reward so if we take a drug like
cocaine cocaine causes a large amount of
dopamine to be dumped into your reward
system like very quickly whereas gaming
is like slow steady dopamine with spurts
and that's why you can play a game for
like 12 hours and then they're like
moments in the game what do you feel
super excited and it's very kind of
activating and engaging so how does the
body respond to constant stimuli it does
it responds by something called
tolerance and so what what tolerance is
is like if you drink caffeine every day
like at first it kind of wires you and
can keep you up all night but if you
drink enough of it your your brain
actually down regulates caffeine
receptors and what that means is it
numbs itself to the signal of caffeine
so when you needed to drink one cup of
coffee and that would have kept you
wired through the night if you drink
coffee every day like one cup of coffee
isn't gonna keep you wired because your
brain has kind of numbed itself to the
effects of caffeine and so if we look at
gaming people who game a lot their brain
also adapts same principle so it numbs
itself to dopamine and that's what I
call dopamine exhaustion you just like
run out of dopamine and the dopamine
doesn't have really much effect and your
your body it's really a tolerance
principle but and then you kind of
so things like become less fun so then
if you stop gaming so gaming remember is
like a steady stream of dopamine with
spikes but then if you try to do
something like read a book reading a
book just releases less dopamine then
playing a videogame does and so when
people start to like to try to do other
things they find them boring and the
reason they find them boring is because
your brain is built up such a tolerance
to dopamine it's numbing that signal of
enjoyment that's literally why
everything is boring because your brain
numbs the sensation of reward and
pleasure because you've dumped so much
dopamine into your Me's Olympic circuit
but that's how your brain is gonna adapt
so what you need to do is just
understand that for two weeks if you cut
out gaming you're gonna be bored you're
gonna be really bored and that overtime
that boredom is gonna go away in and of
itself and this is the problem that a
lot of gamers make is they conclude that
the activity is what's boring right you
remove yourself from the equation you're
like oh I don't like to read a book
books are boring I don't like to garden
gardening is boring I don't like to go
fishing fishing is boring I don't like
to work out working out is boring I
don't like to go to job my job job is
boring I don't like to go to my classes
class is boring so you associate boredom
with the activity without acknowledging
that your neuro chemistry is actually
what's causing it boring when you find
your job class fishing working out
gardening and reading all boring that's
not everything in the world being boring
that's you right so you have dopamine
exhaustion so what you need to do is
stop exposing your brain to dopamine for
a long time so take a period of like two
weeks do something like a gaming cleanse
and just understand that for two weeks
I'm not gonna be sad I'm not gonna be
shamed I may have low energy level but
the main challenge that you have to you
have to survive two weeks of boredom and
if you survive two weeks a Bourdon
boredom something magical happens all of
those things that you used to be boring
then start becoming fun
then the even more magical thing happens
what gamers want more than anything else
is to enjoy the things that they should
do
gamers look at themselves and they say
oh like I like playing video games and I
find school boring I wish I was like
those people who found school fun
because if I found school fun
they'd enjoy it then I could study and
then I could get a job and then I could
take control of my life
I wish I was like those people well
here's the thing you can be like those
people you can literally do it all you
have to do is alter your neuro chemistry
through a two-week like gaming cleanse
thirty days is better and as your brain
rewires and like recalibrates and as
your tolerance level goes down then
you're gonna enjoy things better and
then you will become the very thing that
you want it to be and once you become
that thing and you enjoy school like
that means you're gonna do better in
your classes that means you're gonna
graduate like you're gonna enjoy working
out more your motivation that intrinsic
motivation that most gamers are missing
will start to come back and as it comes
back like that's how you become a
healthy gamer like that's my whole point
is that like as you build things in your
life that you also find enjoyable you're
living a healthy and fulfilling life and
then you like also get to play video
games the crazy thing is is that even
the best part the games even become more
fun like the gaming becomes more fun
minute to minute hour to hour when the
rest of your life is in order it gets
better
okay I just watched the video with
reckful and hearing the four states of
consciousness got me thinking and
apologies for what will probably turn
out to be a wall of text apology
accepted is game okay so if you guys
want to y'all can go back and look at
the video with reckful I also talked
about this with Devin Nash on one of our
earlier streams about the different like
for states of like consciousness and
mind it's a pretty interesting way to
understand how your mind works as gamers
do you know that feeling when you're
completely immersed in the game and
enter into sort of a trance where your
mind stops thinking you and you become
one with the carrot
yes I do that's called a flow state for
example when playing a shooter you no
longer feel even you no longer even feel
moving your mouse or pressing buttons or
your keyboard no thoughts or anything
you just automatically react react to
whatever's on screen get in your groove
and just play yeah absolutely so the
first thing let's just pause here so
that's a flow state right so a flow
state is a period of time where your
mind is like ultra focused and you lose
some sense of self and you kind of like
become one with the activity so in a
flow state your performance improves you
feel better and like you're not plagued
with stuff like anxieties I find that I
perform exponentially better in that
mindset both in in a game environment
and when attempting to be productive yes
so this is correct
okay so let's pause this for a second
this is exactly what I'm saying
so your productivity has nothing to do
with like whether it's a game or school
or your cooking or whatever the quality
and state of your mind determines your
productivity it goes back to what we
were saying last time about boredom
people think that is a particular thing
that makes them bored no your mind is in
a pro boredom state and if you can get
into a flow state it doesn't matter what
you can do you can be playing to music
you can be singing music you can be
hanging out with your kids you can be
gardening you can be playing a video
game it all gets better everything gets
better and that's because you change
right like this is about remember guys
like in when you're playing the game of
life like you have a character and your
character influences things it's not
just the environment so like it's like
when your character goes into like you
know flow mode you are gonna perform
better it's like a buff to all of your
stats and all of your skills 20%
improvement to all of your stats and all
of your skills when you're a flow state
is that actually it's way more than 20%
it's probably 100% is that State of Mind
similar to the place I'm trying to enter
when meditating yes and no so the goal
of this the meditative mind is to have
consciousness with no mental activity
the goal of a flow state is to have
either consciousness with one pointed in
focus mental activity or focused mental
activity without consciousness that may
actually be a flow State I'm gonna have
to think about that and explore that
myself so the question is like do you
lose track of time and awareness of self
when you're in a flow state because a
flow State may be one pointedness of
mind not a variable mind with actually
no consciousness I'm not sure or whether
consciousness is there or not or not and
what what I will tell you is so I I
teach people how to get into flow States
and these include physicians surgeons
investment bankers professional gamers
NFL athletes and I teach them and train
them how to get into a flow state and
like I teach all of these different
people because the activity doesn't
matter it's the state of mind that
matters right so when I work with like
an eSports team I teach them how to
enter flow States so that like when they
start to tilt and their anxiety like
raises through the roof and it affects
their performance I teach them how to
recalibrate their brains so that they
don't they get out of that state so it's
very similar to end the way I teach that
is by teaching meditation and then we
kind of do additional things as well but
meditation is a great way to facilitate
flow States not exactly the same but
it's like moving you in the general
ballpark I've been chasing that state of
mind since I break out of thought loops
and just simply do very good does anyone
else enter such a mindset when doing
work absolutely very productive people
do
does anyone else even experience what
I'm describing or am I just crazy no
you're not crazy the reason that you
feel like you're crazy is because this
is a hard state of mind to duplicate
right so you have these flashes of
insight where you're in this state of
mind and you're like whoa that was
amazing like I played a better game I'm
able to study and then you try to chase
it right and you even said you chase it
the problem is that the act of chasing
reduces the chance that you'll enter a
front flow state so the more that you
chase the flow state the harder the flow
State is to attain
and then you think you're crazy because
it happens once and it's like brilliant
and wonderful and then like you try to
find it again and you can't find it
again so then you start to question
yourself you're like kind of gaslighting
yourself like did that really happen is
that really possible does this happen to
other people this is kind of weird
because 90% of the time or even 95% of
time or 99% at a time you're in the
thought loop state where your mind is
super active because most of the time as
we live our day our mind is active
that's what it does it's active it's
thinking about stuff that's how we do it
and then rarely you enter a flow state
kind of naturally but that absolutely
works for other people and I'd say that
the more successful people that I meet
tend to enter flow States better and if
you think about like where I was when I
was failing out of college and where I
am now like one of the biggest things
that's changed is my ability to enter a
flow State so I consistently enter flow
States and that's what makes me
successful right it's my state of mind
but this is what I keep telling people
like my personality hasn't changed I'm
so lazy I still procrastinate I still
like watch the Leipzig major instead of
doing my work but the difference is that
I enter flow States on a pretty regular
basis and since I enter flow States I
tend to be productive enough and I do
well in life it's not crazy
so I'd say absolutely try to cultivate
flow States then your question is gonna
be how which is a fair question so we'll
let me just think about how to teach you
guys how to that's like a long thing
though
I can't just explain that in five
minutes beyond meditating but I don't
think that's sufficient so let me think
I'm just gonna have to add that like I
have to so we're developing a curriculum
of like start to finish stuff about
meditation and Tyrel and Ayurveda so I'm
gonna have to add a segment on flow
States then how to cultivate them so I'm
just gonna have to make a mental note to
do that okay
by the way so you guys know sometimes I
do what I just did and I pause on stream
and I like stop doing whatever I'm doing
and sometimes when I'm talking to people
it's kind of awkward but I'm gonna say
I'm gonna just think for a minute that
is literally me trying to go into like a
little mini flow state like it's like me
taking a step back in reducing my
thought loops and if I'm really really
desperate then I'll really try to go
into a flow state because if I'm
desperate and I don't know what to think
like I literally what that means is my
brain is picking up on something that I
cannot logically process and it's too
much so I have to pause and I have to
like get into the flow state and then
something like some answer comes out and
that's part of what makes me effective
like if you guys watch my interviews
we'll see if it happens today so keep an
eye out so actually this is what we
should do today so I want you guys to be
more active viewers today okay I want
you guys to look watch me and try to see
when I enter a flow state and when I
don't and try to see when is my thinking
logical and when is it not logical and
just because it's not logical doesn't
mean it's wrong but I think you guys
will be able to see some of the stuff
that I do is logical in a product of the
analytical mind but some of it is not
the analytical mind and I'm trying to do
like this crap like I don't know how
else to describe it but like I it's
something like meditation something like
a flow state something like intuition as
opposed to analysis and try to see if
you can tell the difference okay and
then we'll talk about it a little bit
after the interview okay this is a great
question I see you keep flaming therapy
is there a situation which therapy is
the right move what alternatives do you
recommend so I I think therapy is
fantastic so I was sharing with you guys
my personal beefs with therapy right but
that's like
I think it's important when you engage
in a practice to understand its
weaknesses it doesn't mean that the
practice is bad right you can also say
that like college sucks for all kinds of
reasons it doesn't mean that college is
bad but college sucks because people are
click is sure like you know people their
fraternities or like you can say
whatever you want to about things being
negative so I want to thank you for
answering this question because I think
therapy is actually really good and like
I said I recommended therapy to him so I
think that you know I was being critical
of a therapist was just really unfair
because I didn't understand you know the
therapist may have been making their
judgment based on all the information
that Jake was sharing with them so the
therapist may be correct too
so it does sound like the dad is
emotionally unavailable to be fair right
because we can sort of infer that it's
not like rocket science so it's kind of
a dick thing for me to say I think
therapy is actually very good I mean I'm
a therapist in my day job so I think
it's very effective I think a lot of
people could benefit from it I think
most people could benefit from it but I
think like with anything that you do in
life you should understand what the
shortcomings and downsides are because
that allows you to protect against them
so the funny thing is that I think that
something like what we do on stream is a
very good adjunct to therapy so I think
if you want to correct your life you
should meditate watch stuff like this
stream work out you know watch like
professional streams and stuff to like
learn how to make a resume and go to
therapy I think it's actually oftentimes
the right call and very rarely is that
the wrong call
what's your opinion on Kundalini Yoga so
I think Kundalini Yoga is an incredibly
powerful spiritual practice that should
be done under the guidance of a guru
so Kundalini Yoga can like literally
make people go crazy so I was talking a
little bit I don't know if I mentioned
this but there are you know there case
reports of meditation induced psychosis
meditation is also practiced that comes
with risks and Kundalini Yoga is
actually one of the more riskier kinds
of yoga now if you go to like a yoga
studio and they'd have a kundalini yoga
class that's not real Kundalini Yoga
that's all of that is hot day yoga and
it's all awesome awesome is yoga
postures so 99% or 95% of what they
teach it in yoga classes yoga studio is
like in the West is not true inauthentic
Kundalini Yoga so true and authentic
Kundalini Yoga involves a couple of
things leak shock which means initiation
the second thing so it involves ASSA and
it also involves prana I am so certain
breathing practices it also involves
very specific modernist mood the resin
Bundys pattern are specific meditation
or focusing techniques mudras or
particular hand signs or locks and
Bundys or locks so you lock certain
parts of your body to shift the flow of
your branagh so true Kundalini Yoga
involves like all of that stuff and if
you do that under without the guidance
of a guru like I really don't think that
that's safe but I think it's really
powerful I so a big part of my personal
practice very early on and what I felt
was somewhat transformative was
Kundalini Yoga okay hey dr. K just
recently found your channel I'm starting
my internship this year and will soon be
wrapping up my clinical psych PhD as I
move into my career I think at some
point it would be awesome to do
something on the side that benefits the
community I grew up in a lot of mmo's
and fighting games any suggestions for
ways to give back to the community have
you ever thought about collaborating
with other mental health providers and
professionals with this stuff yeah so
first of all I think it's great that
you're pursuing a psych PhD and that you
want to give back to your your gamer
bros and girls and everything in between
so I think
ways to get back to the community so you
know you're welcome to get involved with
us so we're we're you know as we're
training coaches and stuff I'm we're
exploring a lot of other kind of options
and I think if you're especially a
trained psychologist that would be cool
so you could try to help us because
we're trying to help people and they're
more people than I can help and the
second thing is have I thought about
collaborating with other mental health
providers and professionals absolutely
so I you know I have a couple of
professional connections that are you
know all over the place so like there
are other therapists and psychiatrists
that I talked to about what the work
that I'm doing some of them find me
because their YouTube algorithm sent me
send me their way and then I'm also
trying to educate psychiatrists and
soon-to-be psychologists about video
game addiction and stuff like that so I
do some national stuff I teach a lot
through residency programs and through
HMS I I'm doing stuff with the American
Psychiatric Association so I have like
this whole academic side like part of
the reason that I only stream like six
or seven hours a week is because you
know I do all this other kind of
academic stuff clinical stuff things
like that I mean if you're interested in
getting involved with that you know we
have a prospective collaboration with
MIT going on so we'll see how that goes
to actually like study neuroscience and
things like that so you know if you're
interested in getting involved in any of
that stuff reach out I think we're gonna
try to add a link at the bottom for
people who are interested in
volunteering or getting involved so yeah
yeah if you guys want me to quit in
instream full-time you got it I got to
get those sweet sweet subs and I've
transman dr. K has bills to pay do you
think we shouldn't listen to music 24/7
because our minds are overstimulated
um no I think the bigger problem well I
guess yeah maybe maybe the answer is yes
so I'd be really curious why you listen
to music 24/7 like what do you get like
if you're listening to something 24/7
aren't you basically drowning it out
like do you really listen to it I mean I
find music to be incredibly impactful
for my mental state like I really like
it to get me in the right kind of mood
to work or facilitate a flow State or
get pumped up but I find that like them
you know you you have to be intentional
I mean if I intentionally listen to
music it pumps me up if it's playing on
in the background as less of an effect
so I listen to certain music before I
stream and I think it puts me in like a
good mindset and do I think your mind is
gonna be too stimulated yeah so I think
that you should give your mind a break
for mental activity so remember that
your mind is sort of like a cow and
likes to chew over things so it's like
it wants to like chew cud and things
like that so it wants like chew over
things so I think if you I found that in
my life like I noticed one day that you
know I would listen to an audio like I
listen to audio lectures and stuff in
the morning when I was in med school and
then on the train I would listen to an
audio lecture when I was walking to the
train when I sat down on the train I
would study I would listen to an audio
book or something like that when I get
off the train and walk into class then
I'm in class and like basically like the
whole day my mind was occupied by you
know audio lectures or audio books which
I listened to a lot of and there was
this phase in my life where I felt like
I didn't want to waste a moment I always
wanted to be learning something so a lot
of audiobooks in between studying and
then I realized like actually I'm just
my mind is just I need to give my mind
time to just be itself because I think
something you guys have to remember is
that sure you can learn a lot from other
people and reading things and stuff like
that but do not underestimate what your
mind can discover so if you give your
mind enough like
space it will process things and help
you understand things and make
discoveries of its own it'll give you
creative ideas like just think about
this for a second you know like I don't
know if you guys are Game of Thrones
fans and I'm talking about the show
talking about books but you know if you
think about that like how did george RR
martin like his mind came up with that
right if he was constantly listening to
stuff and constantly occupying his time
he would not be able to create new ideas
new ideas and creativity requires space
for them to happen and if you feel stuck
in life if you feel uninspired part of
that may be because you're not giving
your mind the space to actually like
figure out what it wants to do so I
think you should be careful about me
listening to music 24/7 and really try
to understand what is it doing for you
and what is it doing for your mind
what's happening in the brain with you
all of a sudden stop enjoying games and
actually prefer doing more productive
things is it still about dopamine levels
the short answer is I don't know and no
one does okay the long answer is I don't
think so so I think that over time if
you feel stuck in life or if you engage
your mind in other ways that's gonna
like create intrinsic motivations or
pulls away from video games the other
thing that happens over time is that
your frontal lobes and prefrontal cortex
mature so frontal lobes and prefrontal
cortex are responsible for impulse
control and being able to delay
gratification so when you're like a
five-year-old
your capacity to enjoy investing a lot
of work and getting out of it versus an
immediate reward is like really skewed
like five-year-olds don't get much
accomplishment out of growing a tomato
plant over the course of months and like
getting value out of like getting that
tomato it mean like when spring comes
around
right they don't have that capacity
because their prefrontal cortex so
they'll eat the tomato they'll enjoy the
tomato but the idea of like invested
work and like reaping those rewards is
not something that their brain enjoys as
much as like impulsive activities as we
grow older
so our IQ can top out relatively quickly
but our brain involves so much more than
like analytical capability so our
frontal lobes develop until about the
age of 30 and some people even say like
30 to 35 I suspect in gamers they
actually continue to develop because
they're like sort of delayed in their
development until like 32 to 35 and so a
lot of that change in enjoyment is
because as your frontal lobes develop
your capacity to enjoy activities that
involve delayed gratification and your
sense of accomplishment from a hard
day's work is actually actually changes
so that's just one circuit in addition
or one neuro scientific principle that
in addition to dopamine can explain your
response but I think there's all kinds
of other stuff that goes on like other
kinds of psychological things and stuff
like that but the short answer is it's
complicated and no one really knows but
I do think it's way more than dopamine
and the simplest thing is you know as
you grow older your capacity to delay
gratification and enjoy high investment
activities increases dr. K I've noticed
quite a few references so we'll do like
two more questions then we're gonna wrap
up okay dr. K I've noticed quite a few
references to spirituality in the videos
of yours that I've seen so far do you
find spirituality conflicts with
scientific research not at all
so let me be clear about a couple of
things so the reason that I talk about
spirituality is because you guys asked
for it right so the early phases of our
if you guys like go through our healthy
game or like the original YouTube list
like the twelve videos for the first
workshop that I did and we've got about
25 other videos that are just collecting
dust
I talked very little about spirituality
it's all psychology and neuroscience
well referenced the interesting thing as
I've started interacting with my
community and as I've started streaming
what I see
so let's just take our inner what I see
is like Adam like what's missing is not
the science it's like this the stuff
that we call spirituality so if we think
about our last interview with Jake we
can talk so we did a lot of like
psychology stuff at the beginning we
talked about emotions we talked about
alexithymia we helped him find his
emotions and that's like that helps him
but it's not like the full story for him
right the full story for him I didn't
feel like the interview was complete
until we talked about Dharma so I think
what's missing and what people ask for
is like I mean the most questions that
I've are about Dharma and so that's
what's missing you guys lack purpose
it's not just depression and anxiety and
that's also why this isn't therapy
because therapy is about treating
depression and anxiety
it's about diagnosing and treating a
particular condition this is this goes
beyond that right like we started with
some psychology and then like we
absolutely moved on to spirituality with
the end so I'm talking more about
spirituality because that's what I'm
sensing people need and science I mean I
think they're both great I don't think
they conflict at all so I think that
over time science and spirituality are
gonna get closer and closer and closer
together so the more that we understand
let me just think if I could find a good
example of this so this is gonna be kind
of a stretch but how to explain this
because they're just some assumptions
that we take for granted which we think
are logical and scientific but are not
actually logical and scientific so let's
talk for a second about okay so this may
not make much sense and I have to
probably formulate this argument better
but I'm gonna just try
so karma is a spiritual concept right
like people think about God Amara karma
is a spiritual concept it's not a
scientific concept but if you really
look at this the definition of Karma all
karma means is cause and effect
garma just says that there are causes
and their effects and that if you see in
effect now there is a cause in the past
that explains why things are the way
that they are that is really all the
theory of karma says that's the essence
of the theory of karma and so we look at
that and we say okay the theory of karma
is kind of like not scientific right you
can look at something like physics and
then as people discovered like law like
so Yogi's have been saying that all
effects are preceded by causes for
thousands of years before we understood
like Newtonian physics that was not
accepted within the scientific community
Newton was the one who discovered like
the laws you know his laws of physics
which is that every action has an equal
and opposite reaction that became
science and we now all accept that is
true but after Isaac Newton but before
that garma was saying that all along
like karma and Isaac Newton are saying
like basically the same thing and now we
just assume that that scientific so in
our minds a concept that used to be
under the umbrella of spirituality has
now been moved to scientific because of
scientific exploration right like that's
what's happened now we regard that
concept is not spiritual anymore but its
scientific even though it's been talked
about by spiritual people for thousands
of years so here's the next example of
that is genetics so people said okay
fine in the realm of physics we can say
that every action has an equal and
opposite reaction but when someone is
born a particular way is that random and
the answer is no that the genetics and
now we sort of all accept genetics we
all understand genetics but you have to
like think of like put yourself in the
shoes of someone like in the 1800's and
like how radical of a concept genetics
is
that your physical form is not
determined by like is determined by like
something that is like not under your
control at all and has nothing to do
with this life like your choices or
anything like that that genetics is
essentially like the process of some
cause that creates a particular effect
and that's kind of like a no-brainer
right like that's like a no-brainer like
Dalek genetics means that my hair is
black because both my parents have black
hair but that was actually like a
relatively revolutionary concept like
over a hundred years ago and gadhimai
has sort of implies that and you can you
can make an argument that karma doesn't
imply that and that's a fair argument go
down that road but I I think that
actually what's happening is that the
more we investigate science the closer
the more we're finding scientific
validity for certain spiritual concepts
so I'll give you guys sort of the last
example which we don't fully understand
yet
so I talked a lot about Dharma Dharma is
duty or responsibility and it's my
belief that Dharma is the thing that
allows you to face difficult things in
life and choose the right thing despite
it being hard so in addiction psychiatry
research what we've realized is that for
people to quit in addiction so people
people took a bunch of people who were
addicted to substances and then tried to
understand how is it that one person is
able to quit and another person is
unable to quit so we did qualitative and
quantitative research on people who are
addicted to substances and we tried to
look for the sweet secret sauce like
where's the magic like what is it that
allows one person to overcome alcoholism
and another person to not overcome
alcoholism and the answer is something
called a competing interest or that's
not the answer it's one of the variables
right there are a lot of variables we
don't know and so competing interest is
like a good reason that makes it worth
your while to quit the substance and
that is Dharma like those are that's the
same thing so like science it talks
about a competing interest
Yogi's talk about Tata MA and it like
the end of the day a competing interest
in the tournament it's like a good
reason a duty or a responsibility if you
actually look at what are examples of
competing interests and I've talked
about this before but I'll give you guys
an example so I was like working with
someone around smoking cessation and I
tried to inform them of all the dangers
of smoking cessation like lung cancer
heart disease stroke etc and as much as
I hate them week after week after week
after week after week they didn't quit
smoking and then one day I decided to be
a dick and I said do you ever want to
see your daughter graduate from college
do you ever want to see her get married
and do you ever want to meet your
grandkids that got him to change because
that's his Dharma
that's a competing interest same thing
so I don't think that spirituality and
scientific research conflict at all in
fact I think the more that we advance in
scientific research the closer we will
validate certain spiritual concepts the
reason I say certain spiritual concepts
this is very important because I don't
think all spiritual concepts are correct
I think as we investigate some we will
not find any evidence of them and as we
investigate others we will see what's
true and what is it because that's
what's cool about science science tells
us what's true the thing that we have to
be careful about though is that we have
to understand that science is still
progressing in our capacity for science
is still in its infancy in some areas
especially when it comes to psychology
and neuroscience like we understand like
Newtonian mechanics pretty well we're
getting a better sense of things like
quantum mechanics we have a pretty good
understanding cardiac physiology we have
a pretty good understanding of
endocrinology we have less of an
understanding of the immune system less
of an understanding of the brain and
even less understanding of psychology
right so what that means is that we have
to remember that just because science is
not discovered or validated a particular
spiritual concept is that concept
related to something that is in the
neuroscience or psychology round because
if so we're gonna suck at investigating
that so you have to have you have to
remember that some spiritual concepts
are gonna be wrong and that you
shouldn't accept spirituality just for
its own sake that spirituality should in
and can be tested by science but also
that science has limitations
that science is not going to be
appropriately equipped to test for
things like reincarnation we just don't
have the scientific capability of that
yet so is it logical to believe in it is
it scientific to believe in it
absolutely not but it is my hope that
one day we will progress science to the
point of somehow being able to test
reincarnation because if it is real that
means that science should be able to
test it at some point that's like that's
how the world works right and I know it
sounds absolutely crazy today but I
think you guys just have to remember
that like a thousand years ago we didn't
understand how electricity worked we
sure as hell didn't understand the brain
we didn't understand like something like
we couldn't send someone to the moon a
thousand years ago
we couldn't send someone of the room two
hundred years ago those would have been
completely ludicrous we didn't even know
what the moon was a thousand years ago
so it's like so there are things that
sound absolutely ridiculous and I
understand that it sounds absolutely
ridiculous to be able to test
reincarnation like what the f are you
talking about how do you even go about
doing that short answer is I don't know
I don't have any idea but we should be
careful not to have scientific arrogance
that our capacity to test and understand
the world right now is like anywhere
close to complete because there is
nothing that I can there I've seen no
evidence although our capacity to
understand is growing at an asset a
exponential rate I have no idea where
the asymptote is if that makes sense to
people like I don't know like we could
continue growing at this rate of
scientific understanding for 2,000 years
and be like ten thousand times as smart
as we are today and still like not
understand half of what goes on in the
universe so I don't think that those
conflict at all and what I actually
really like is like what gives me a lot
of personal like comfort and confidence
is when there are scientific points that
validate spiritual concepts and in my
personal life and also like in my
treatment what I try to do is find the
areas where spirituality and science
overlap and it's those things that I
recommend the strong them the most like
we're
in the best example of that is every
stream I don't talk about iron mother I
don't talk about reincarnation I sort of
talk about Dharma because that's what
you guys want but what is the one thing
that I recommend on every single stream
you guys know absolutely and why is that
it's because there is overwhelming
spiritual support for it and
overwhelming scientific support for it
and let's remember so meditation is the
last example that'll leave you guys with
let's remember that meditation was
thought is like hokey silly stuff that
yoga hippies did back in the 60s it had
no scientific validation and so people
assumed it was false because it had not
been studied and now like meditation is
like they're just gigantic Institute's
that are studying the effects of
meditation so let's remember let's be
humble and not practice scientific
arrogance and remember that just because
something has not been scientifically
investigated does not mean it is false
so reincarnation is where meditation was
a hundred years ago just because we
don't know how to study it and haven't
tried does not mean it is false which is
one of the biggest mistakes that I see a
lot of people who are like prosigns and
anti religion make right it's like we
just don't we haven't studied it
appropriately so am I asking you to
believe in it no but it doesn't it's
just like we haven't studied it yet like
I don't even know how to study like I
don't even know how that works but
anyway great question okay last question
would you say you're enlightened if yes
at what age did it happened and can you
get more enlightened what I say I'm
enlightened know what at what age it
hasn't happened yet and then can you get
a more lined sort of so there are many
stages of consciousness that apparently
like you can purify so there's like a
level one enlightenment level to
enlightenment level three enlightenment
if you read but then Julie's yoga system
is he talks about some of this stuff I'm
not quite sure about all that stuff
because I haven't I haven't experienced
it and I haven't seen scientific
evidence of it so I don't really like
I don't talk about it much so I've
studied it and I can talk about it but
the things that I tend to rely on are
things that are based on my personal
experience or clinical experience and
that which has scientific validation so
there you know there's Samadhi which is
a stage of temporary enlightenment and
then there are like other stages of
enlightenment supposedly after that and
then there's the complete enlightenment
which is at the end and I just don't
talk about it because I don't really
understand it and I'm not enlightened so
I think one thing one good example of
this is that I do think for example
different stages of enlightenment or
different faculties that they describe
to ascribe to enlightened people do map
on pretty cool with like different parts
of the brain so I think as we understand
as people meditate it's not just because
enlightenment is sort of like a global
level up right it's not like leveling up
one skill it's just like it's like like
Super Saiyan form it's like a different
form of human being where everything is
boosted and that's what we actually see
so that's how spirituality and yoga
describes enlightenment or Dao or
Buddhism and we actually see that in
science that as you meditate you get
your attention gets better your
concentration gets better your memory
gets better your capacity for empathy
gets better your narcissism goes down
your capacity to delay gratification
gets better your capacity to for impulse
control gets better so if we look really
look at it scientifically meditation is
like a buff to everything which is
aligned with what people actually have
people describe enlightenment is like a
global improvement I mean there are very
few things in medicine that actually
have global improvements right so I mean
I think that meditation and and
spirituality and science are like not
exclusive at all in fact I think that's
it's the areas that they overlap which
gives you guidance on both so if there's
a scientific concept you know if there's
a bet if there's a spiritual concept
which has no validation in science then
like it's less valuable than the ones
that do have ala Dacian science
[Music]
okay okay guys thank you guys very much
we're gonna go ahead and wrap up and I
just want to thank everyone so I saw we
had some gifted subs from